---
title: Rashomon
pubDate: 1971-03-05
categories: Ryunosuke Akutagawa
description: ''
lang: en
canonicalSlug: Rashomon
---

It was late one day. A servant, Gennin, was waiting for the rain to stop under the Rashomon Gate.

There was no one under the wide gate but him. Only a cricket perched on a large column, its paint peeling off in places. Since the Rashomon Gate is located on Suzakuoji Street, there must be at least two or three more people besides this man, including Ichimegasa, a woman who stops the rain, and Moeboshi, a man who rubs his head in a raven hat. But there were none other than this man.

The reason for this is that for the past 23 years, Kyoto has been hit by a series of disasters such as earthquakes, Tsujikaze, fires, and famines. The city of Rakuchu is not all that deserted. According to the old chronicles, Buddhist statues and implements were smashed, and the wood, with its tannin and gold and silver leaf attached, was piled up on the streets and sold for firewood and wood for firewood. Since the entire city of Kyoto was in such a state of disrepair, there was no one to look back on the repairs to the Rashomon gate. The ruin of the area was taken advantage of, and foxes and raccoon dogs took up residence there. Thieves and robbers inhabited the place. Eventually, it became a custom to bring unclaimed dead people to this gate and dispose of them. So, when the daylight fades, people are so disgusted that they no longer visit the neighborhood around this gate.

Instead, many raven crows came from somewhere. During the daytime, you can see many of these ravens flying around in a circle, chirping and crying around the high kite. When the sky above the gate was red with the glow of the setting sun, the ravens were clearly visible as if they were sprinkled with sesame seeds. The ravens, of course, come to peck at the flesh of the dead above the gate. --But today, perhaps because of the late hour, not a single raven was in sight. However, on the stone steps, which were crumbling in some places and had long grass growing on them, I could see raven feces and feces stuck in white spots. The servant was sitting on the top step of the seven-step stone staircase, with his bottom of a washed-out navy blue sliding door, watching the rain fall, worrying about a large pimple on his right cheek.

The author wrote earlier, “The servant was waiting for the rain to stop. However, even if it stopped raining, the servants had no particular reason to do anything about it. Normally, he would have returned to his master's house. However, his master gave him a leave of absence forty-five days ago. As I have already mentioned, Kyoto was in a state of decline at the time. The fact that this servant was given leave of absence by his master, who had been using him for many years, was in fact nothing more than a small aftermath of this decline. Therefore, rather than saying that the servant was waiting for the rain to stop, it would be more appropriate to say that the servant was at his wit's end because he had no place to go when the rain came. Moreover, today's weather also had a considerable influence on the sentimentalisme of this Heian-period servant. The rain that had begun to fall at that time of the day still showed no sign of rising. So, the servant, trying to deal with his life tomorrow at any cost - that is to say, trying to deal with what he could not control, was listening to the sound of the rain that had been falling on the Suzakuoji Street for some time now. I was listening to the sound of rain falling on Suzakuoji Avenue.

The rain was covering the Rashomon Gate, and the sound of the rain was coming from far away. The evening darkness gradually lowered the sky, and when I looked up, I saw that the roof of the gate was propped up by heavy, dark clouds at the end of a slanting tiled roof.

There is no time to choose the means to do something about something that cannot be done. If we had to choose, we would have to starve to death on the ground or on the roadside. Then they will be brought to this gate and abandoned like dogs. If we don't choose,” the servant's thought went down the same road again and again until it finally arrived at this place. But this “if” was always “if” after all. The servant, while affirming that he would not choose any means, could not muster the courage to positively affirm that he would have no choice but to become a thief and a thief's thief in order to settle this “if,” which would naturally follow.

The servant sneezed loudly and then stood up with great gravity. The evening chill in Kyoto was so cold that he wished he had a fire bucket. The wind blew between the pillars of the gate without restraint as dusk fell. The cricket, which had been perched on a painted pillar, had already gone away.

The servants looked around the gate, their shoulders high on the dark blue sliding doors covered with sweat undergarments made of Yamabuki (wildflowers), while their necks were wrinkled. He looked around the gate with his shoulders high on the navy blue sliding door, which was covered with a layer of sweat undergarments made of Yamabuki Yamabuki (a type of bamboo), and thought that if there was a place where he could sleep comfortably for the night without fear of being seen, he would spend the night there. Fortunately, I saw a wide ladder, also painted in red, that led up to the tower above the gate. If there were people up there, they would have been dead anyway. The servant, careful not to sheathe his sword, which he carried at his waist, stepped onto the bottom rung of the ladder wearing straw sandals and sandals.

A few minutes later, he stepped onto the bottom rung of the ladder. On the middle rung of the wide ladder that led to the top of Rashomon's tower, a man was hunched over like a cat, watching the scene above with bated breath. The firelight coming from the top of the tower was faintly wetting the man's right cheek. The man's short beard was covered with red pustules and pimples. From the beginning, the servant had assumed that all the people up there were dead. But when I climbed up a couple of rungs on the ladder, I saw that someone was lighting fires up there and moving the fires here and there. This was immediately recognized by the shimmering, muddy yellowish light reflected on the ceiling, which was covered with cobwebs in every corner. It was no ordinary person who was lighting a fire above the Rashomon Gate on this rainy night.

The servant, his footsteps as silent as those of Morimiya Yamori, finally crawled up the steep ladder to the top step. Then, keeping his body as flat as possible, he put his neck forward as far as he could and peeked fearfully inside the tower.

As I looked, I saw that, as I had heard, there were several corpses randomly dumped inside the building, but I could not tell how many there were because the area covered by the firelight was narrower than I had expected. However, what I do know, albeit dimly, is that some of the corpses are naked and some are clothed. Of course, there were women and men among them. The corpses were all lying around on the floor with their mouths open or hands outstretched, as if they were dolls made of kneaded clay, to the extent that it was doubtful that they were once living human beings. Moreover, their shoulders and chests were lit up by a dim fire, darkening the shadows of the lower parts of their bodies, and they remained silent as if they were mute.

The servants covered their noses at the putrid smell of the carcasses. However, his hand forgot to cover his nose the next moment. A strong emotion had almost entirely robbed the man of his sense of smell.

It was then that the servant's eyes saw for the first time the man crouched in the carcass. She was a short, thin, gray-haired, ape-like old woman in a cypress-bark-colored kimono. The old woman was holding a piece of pinewood in her right hand, which she had lit on fire, as if peering into the face of one of the corpses. Judging by the long hair, it was probably a woman's corpse.

The servant, moved by six parts fear and four parts curiosity, forgot even to breathe for a while. In the words of the old chronicler, he felt as if “even the hair on his head had grown fat. Then the old woman inserted a piece of pine wood between the floorboards, put her hands around the neck of the corpse she had been gazing at, and began to pull out its long hair one by one, just as a monkey parent pulls the lice out of a monkey cub. The hair seemed to fall out according to his hands.

As the hairs fell out one by one, the fear gradually disappeared from the servants' hearts. And at the same time, the fierce hatred toward the old woman began to move little by little. --No, it may be a misnomer to say that it was against this old woman. Rather, the antipathy toward all kinds of evil grew stronger with each passing minute. If someone had asked the servant the question he had been thinking about earlier, whether he would starve to death or become a thief, he would have chosen to starve to death without a second thought. That is how much this man's hatred of evil was burning up like a piece of pine wood on an old woman's floor.

The servant, of course, did not understand why the old woman would pull out a dead man's hair. Thus, rationally, he did not know whether it was a good or bad thing to do. But to the servant, pulling out a dead man's hair on this rainy night on top of the Rashomon Gate was already an unforgivable evil in itself. Of course, the servant had already forgotten that he had been planning to become a thief.

So, the servant, putting all his strength into his legs, suddenly jumped up from the ladder. Then, with his hand on the sword, he walked up to the old woman. Needless to say, the old woman was surprised.

When she saw the servant, she jumped up as if she had been hit by a crossbow.

Where are you going?

The servant cursed, blocking the old woman's way as she stumbled over the carcass and tried to flee in a panic. The old woman still tried to push the servant away. The servant also pushed her back, trying not to let her go. For a while, the two clutched at the corpse in silence. But they knew from the beginning that they would win. The servant finally grabbed the old woman's arm and forced her down. The old woman's arm was just like the leg of a chicken or a chicken's leg, only made of bone and skin.

What were you doing? Tell me. Tell me, or this is what you get.

The servant shoved the old woman away from him, and suddenly sheathed his sword and held it up to his eyes, the white color of its steel sheath. But the old woman remained silent. Her hands were flailing, her shoulders were heaving, and her eyes were so wide open that they looked as if they were about to protrude out of her eyelids. Seeing this, the servant became aware for the first time that the life and death of this old woman were totally controlled by her own will. This awareness cooled the hatred that had been burning so fiercely in his heart. All that remained was the peaceful satisfaction and pride he felt when a task was completed to perfection. The servant looked down at the old woman, but softened his voice a little and said, “I am the one who is in charge of the kenjibei.

I am not an official of the government. I am a traveler who has just passed under this gate. So I have no intention of putting a rope around you. All you have to do is tell me what you were doing at the gate at this time.

The old woman's eyes widened as she stared intently into the servant's face. She looked at him with sharp eyes like those of a predatory bird, with reddened eyelids. Then he moved his wrinkled lips, which were almost united with his nose, as if he were chewing something. In his narrow throat, I could see the pointed larynx and throat lobe moving. Then a voice like a raven crow's cry came from the throat, panting and wheezing, and carried to the servant's ears.

I was going to pull out this hair, this hair, and use it as a wig.

The servant was disappointed that the old woman's answer was so ordinary. At the same time, the old woman's hatred for him came into his heart, along with a cold contempt. Then, the old woman, still holding one hand in the other, said, “I am sorry, but I am not sure I can do this. The old woman, still holding in one hand a long, fallen hair taken from the head of the carcass, mumbled in a voice like a muffled toadstool, “I'm sorry, I'm sorry, I'm sorry, I'm sorry, I'm sorry.
